Ass - 6
Assignment 6 :
Virtualization
Prerequisite
1. Concept of Virtualization.
● Virtualization is a technology that helps us to install different Operating
Systems on a hardware.
● They are completely separated and independent from each other.
● Virtualization hides the physical characteristics of computing resources from
their users, their applications or end users. This includes making a single
physical resource
(such as a server, an operating system, an application or a storage device) appear
to function as multiple virtual resources. It can also include making multiple
physical resources (such as storage devices or servers) appear as a single virtual
resource...”

2. Virtualization types:
Server Virtualization:
It is virtualizing your server infrastructure
where you do not have to use any more
physical servers for different purposes.
Client and Desktop Virtualization:
This is similar to server
virtualization, but this time is on the
user’s site where you virtualize their
desktops. We change their desktops
with thin clients and by utilizing the
datacenter resources.Services and applications of
Virtualization : The virtualization
technology isolates applications from
the underlying operating system and
from other applications, in order to
increase compatibility and

manageability. For example –
Docker can be used for that purpose.
1. Network Virtualization
It is a part of virtualization
infrastructure, which is used
especially if you are going to
visualize your servers. It helps
you in creating multiple
switching, Vlans, NAT-ing, etc.
The following illustration
shows2. Storage Virtualization
This is widely used in data
centers where you have a big
storage and it helps you to
create, delete, allocated storage
to different hardware. This
allocation is done through
network connection. The leader
on storage is SAN. A schematic
illustration is given below:
3. Hypervisor and its types.
A hypervisor is a thin software layer that intercepts operating system calls to the hardware.
It is also called the Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM). It creates a virtual
platform on the host computer, on top of which multiple guest operating
systems are executed and monitored.
Hypervisors are two types:
1. Native of Bare Metal Hypervisor
Native hypervisors are software systems that run directly on the host's
hardware to control the hardware and to monitor the Guest Operating
Systems. The guest Operating system runs on a separate level above the
hypervisor. All of them have Virtu2. Hosted Hypervisor
Hosted hypervisors are designed to run within a traditional operating
system. In other words, a hosted hypervisor adds a distinct software layer
on top of the host operating system. While, the guest operating system
becomes a third software level above the hardware.
A well-known example of a hosted hypervisor is Oracle VM VirtualBox.
Others include VMWare Server and Workstation, Microsoft Virtual PC,
KVM, QEMU and Parallels.
Advantages of Virtualization
1. Using Virtualization for Efficient Hardware Utilization
2. Using Virtualization to Increase Availability
3. Disaster Recovery
4. Save Energy
5. Deploying Servers too fast
6. Save Space in your Server Room or Datacenter
7. Testing and setting up Lab Environment
8. Shifting all your Local Infrastructure to Cloud in a day
Disadvantages of Virtualization
1. Extra Costs
2. Software Licensing
3. Learn the new Infrastructure